feat(server): add GET /api/v1/llm-d/samples endpoint for LLMInferenceServiceConfig templates (#852)
opendatahub-io/odh-model-controller: server/docs/features/llm-d/samples/samples-api.md

# Samples API

This document describes the API endpoint that serves `LLMInferenceServiceConfig` sample templates to the llm-d

> deployment wizard UI.

Reviewer: Can we avoid putting UI elements here? Not sure that kind of design coupling needs to happen. 

Currently, we are not actually using it in the wizard UI.

Reviewer 2: I am not sure it's a coupling. UI is one of the clients that can leverage this service. Maybe we could adjust the wording here to be less opinionated.

Author: I'd like to keep this documentation trail as one of the use cases for this endpoint, there is no real coupling

**Status:** Implemented 
**Author:** [Pierangelo Di Pilato](https://github.com/pierDipi)  
**Date:** Jun 22, 2026

## Motivation

The UI deployment wizard needs to pre-populate YAML editors with `LLMInferenceServiceConfig` templates based on the
selected workload topology or router type. Rather than hardcoding templates in the dashboard, the odh-model-controller

> server serves them as static, heavily commented YAML files embedded at build time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
server serves them as static, extensively commented YAML files that can help the user make the right choice. Those files are currently embedded at build time.
```

Author: done

|------------|----------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `type`     | Yes      | The `opendatahub.io/config-type` label value                                                                                                                    |
| `topology` | No       | Workload topology hint. Only meaningful when `type=router`. If the topology ends with `-pd`, the P/D disaggregated router sample is returned instead of the default. |

### Responses

| Status | Content-Type       | Body                                                  |
|--------|--------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| 200    | `application/yaml` | Single YAML document (`LLMInferenceServiceConfig` CR) |
| 400    | `application/json` | `{"error": "missing required query parameter: type"}` |
| 404    | `application/json` | `{"error": "no sample found for type: <type>"}`       |
| 405    | `application/json` | `{"error": "method not allowed"}`                     |

### Examples

```

> GET /api/v1/llm-d/samples?type=workload-single-node-pd

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we could flip around the resource definition and make `sample` a top-level concept and `llm-d` as a concrete type 

`GET /api/v1/samples/llm-d`

we could go one step further and promote type into the path:

`GET /api/v1/samples/llm-d/workload-single-node-pd`

that will help with e.g. caching (which we might add to the server code as follow-up too)

Author: I don't think the type represents the id of the resource, at least not generically, I'm ok with flipping `llm-d/samples` to `samples/llm-d`

Reviewer 2: > I don't think the type represents the id of the resource

Fair point, this is more a collection of things at this point, not a unique identifier. Query param is actually the right fit for filtering.

Here's my braindump of where I thought we could go with this https://gist.github.com/bartoszmajsak/a925ed466f0b4cfd8c658ca358dc5f4e
